feat: Support for Kubernetes v1.33 (#12216)
gardener/gardener: docs/development/new-kubernetes-version.md

### Adapting Gardener

> <!-- // TODO(marc1404): Reference `compare-k8s-feature-gates.sh` script once it has been fixed (https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/11198). -->

Reviewer: I would suggest to revert this diff. It is more correct to tackle this with https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/12109.

  - See [this](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/11197/commits/223bdc0ebdf79f02ac1e50fabe2b92bec3fc1e36) and [this](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/11197/commits/8f1f73c6a0ce74ec952e817451244c4fa86e6bc8) example commit.
  - The list of supported versions is meanwhile maintained [here](../../pkg/utils/validation/kubernetesversion/version.go) in the `SupportedVersions` variable.
- Maintain the Kubernetes feature gates used for validation of `Shoot` resources:
  - The feature gates are maintained in [this](../../pkg/utils/validation/features/featuregates.go) file.

>   - See [this](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9689/commits) example PR how it handles feature gate maintenance by using `compare-k8s-feature-gates.sh`

Reviewer: I would suggest to revert this diff because the script (`compare-k8s-feature-gates.sh`) is about to be added with https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/12109. It is more correct the PR that adds the script to also update the corresponding docs. This diff should be moved to https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/12109.

FYI @Kostov6

- Maintain the Kubernetes `kube-apiserver` admission plugins used for validation of `Shoot` resources:
  - The admission plugins are maintained in [this](../../pkg/utils/validation/admissionplugins/admissionplugins.go) file.
  - See [this](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/11197/commits/116422c95d2c520629e3460376a69de97b5e3b1a) and [this](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9689/commits/94a1bf1bf0d6c0ffb7c59f87f1ccff1d6363ccc2) example commit.
  - To maintain this list for new Kubernetes versions, run `hack/compare-k8s-admission-plugins.sh <old-version> <new-version>` (e.g. `hack/compare-k8s-admission-plugins.sh 1.26 1.27`).
  - It will present 2 lists of admission plugins: those added and those removed in `<new-version>` compared to `<old-version>`.
  - Add all added admission plugins to the `admissionPluginsVersionRanges` map with `<new-version>` as `AddedInVersion` and no `RemovedInVersion`.
  - For any removed admission plugins, add `<new-version>` as `RemovedInVersion` to the already existing admission plugin in the map.

>   - Create a shoot with all the added admission plugins disabled in a local setup and see if shoot creation and deletion will succeed. If it fails that means some of the admission plugins are required. Flag any admission plugins that are required (plugins that must not be disabled in the `Shoot` spec) by setting the `Required` boolean variable to true for the admission plugin in the map.

Reviewer: Cosmetic suggestion
```suggestion
  - In local setup, create a shoot with all of the newly added admission plugins disabled. Make sure that the shoot creation and deletion will succeed. If it fails, that means some of the admission plugins are required. Flag any admission plugins that are required (plugins that must not be disabled in the `Shoot` spec) by setting the `Required` boolean variable to true for the admission plugin in the map.
```

>   - Check the [kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/) if any new admission plugin is not recommended for production usage. Example: `The Kubernetes project recommends that you do not use the SecurityContextDeny admission controller.`. Flag those admission plugins by setting the `Forbidden` boolean variable to true for the admission plugin in the map.

Reviewer 2: Nit:
```suggestion
  - Check the [kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/) if any new admission plugin is not recommended for production usage. Example: `The Kubernetes project recommends that you do not use the SecurityContextDeny admission controller`. Flag those admission plugins by setting the `Forbidden` boolean variable to true for the admission plugin in the map.
```

WDYT about also adding a link to the paragraph where `The Kubernetes project recommends that you do not use the SecurityContextDeny admission controller` is mentioned? The admission was removed in 1.30 and it is not mentioned in the recent documentation form the link you provided. This might be confusing when someone tries to look for `SecurityContextDeny` there.

>   - Check the [kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/) if any new admission plugin is not recommended for production usage. Example: `The Kubernetes project recommends that you do not use the SecurityContextDeny admission controller` (note that this admission controller was removed in Kubernetes 1.30 in [this PR](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9689) and is not mentioned in the latest Kubernetes documentation). Flag those admission plugins by setting the `Forbidden` boolean variable to true for the admission plugin in the map.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Check the [Kubernetes documentation for admission controllers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/) if any newly added admission plugin is not recommended for production usage. Example: `The Kubernetes project recommends that you do not use the SecurityContextDeny admission controller`. Note that this admission controller was removed in Kubernetes 1.30 in [this PR](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9689) and that's why it is not mentioned in the latest Kubernetes documentation. Flag those admission plugins by setting the `Forbidden` boolean variable to true for the admission plugin in the map.
```

- Maintain the Kubernetes `kube-apiserver` API groups used for validation of `Shoot` resources:
  - The API groups are maintained in [this](../../pkg/utils/validation/apigroups/apigroups.go) file.
  - See [this](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/11197/commits/73b655475ac2565a9fdf098f10bab9cfdbed961a) example commit.
  - To maintain this list for new Kubernetes versions, run `hack/compare-k8s-api-groups.sh <old-version> <new-version>` (e.g. `hack/compare-k8s-api-groups.sh 1.26 1.27`).
  - It will present 2 lists of API GroupVersions and 2 lists of API GroupVersionResources: those added and those removed in `<new-version>` compared to `<old-version>`.
  - Add all added group versions to the `apiGroupVersionRanges` map and group version resources to the `apiGVRVersionRanges` map with `<new-version>` as `AddedInVersion` and no `RemovedInVersion`.
  - For any removed APIs, add `<new-version>` as `RemovedInVersion` to the already existing API in the corresponding map.

>   - Create a shoot and a workerless shoot with all the added api groups disabled in the local setup and see if shoot creation and deletion will succeed. If it fails that means some of the api groups are required. Flag any APIs that are required (APIs that must not be disabled in the `Shoot` spec) by setting the `Required` boolean variable to true for the API in the `apiGVRVersionRanges` map. If this API also should not be disabled for [Workerless Shoots](../usage/shoot/shoot_workerless.md), then set `RequiredForWorkerless` boolean variable also to true. If the API is required for both Shoot types, then both of these booleans need to be set to true. If the whole API Group is required, then mark it correspondingly in the `apiGroupVersionRanges` map.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Create a shoot and a workerless shoot with all the added API groups disabled in the local setup and see if shoot creation and deletion will succeed. If it fails, that means some of the API groups are required. Flag any APIs that are required (APIs that must not be disabled in the `Shoot` spec) by setting the `Required` boolean variable to true for the API in the `apiGVRVersionRanges` map. If this API also should not be disabled for [Workerless Shoots](../usage/shoot/shoot_workerless.md), then set `RequiredForWorkerless` boolean variable also to true. If the API is required for both Shoot types, then both of these booleans need to be set to true. If the whole API Group is required, then mark it correspondingly in the `apiGroupVersionRanges` map.
```

>   - Create a shoot and a workerless shoot with all the added API groups disabled in the local setup and see if shoot creation and deletion will succeed. If it fails, that means some of the API groups are required. Flag any APIs that are required (APIs that must not be disabled in the `Shoot` spec) by setting the `Required` boolean variable to true for the API in the `apiGVRVersionRanges` map. If this API also should not be disabled for [Workerless Shoots](../usage/shoot/shoot_workerless.md), then set `RequiredForWorkerless` boolean variable also to true. If the API is required for both Shoot types, then both of these booleans need to be set to true. If the whole API Group is required, then mark it correspondingly in the `apiGroupVersionRanges` map.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - In local setup, create a shoot and a workerless shoot with all of the newly added API groups disabled. Make sure that the shoot creation and deletion will succeed. If it fails, that means some of the API groups are required. Flag any APIs that are required (APIs that must not be disabled in the `Shoot` spec) by setting the `Required` boolean variable to true for the API in the `apiGVRVersionRanges` map. If this API also should not be disabled for [Workerless Shoots](../usage/shoot/shoot_workerless.md), then set `RequiredForWorkerless` boolean variable also to true. If the API is required for both Shoot types, then both of these booleans need to be set to true. If the whole API Group is required, then mark it correspondingly in the `apiGroupVersionRanges` map.
```

- Maintain the Kubernetes `kube-controller-manager` controllers for each API group used in deploying required KCM controllers based on active APIs:
  - The API groups are maintained in [this](../../pkg/utils/kubernetes/controllers.go) file.
  - See [this](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/11197/commits/15f8ad3486edc629ecaaa5e30f10619737d01316) example commit.
  - To maintain this list for new Kubernetes versions, run `hack/compute-k8s-controllers.sh <old-version> <new-version>` (e.g. `hack/compute-k8s-controllers.sh 1.28 1.29`).

>   - If it complains that the path for the controller is not present in the map, check the release branch of the new Kubernetes version and find the correct path for the missing/wrong controller. You can do so by checking the file `cmd/kube-controller-manager/app/controllermanager.go` and where the controller is initialized from. See the example commit. As of now, there is no straight-forward way to map each controller to its file. If this has improved, please enhance the script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If it complains that the path for the controller is not present in the map, check the release branch of the new Kubernetes version and find the correct path for the missing/wrong controller. You can do so by checking the file `cmd/kube-controller-manager/app/controllermanager.go` and where the controller is initialized from. See the [example commit](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/11197/commits/15f8ad3486edc629ecaaa5e30f10619737d01316). As of now, there is no straight-forward way to map each controller to its file. If this has improved, please enhance the script.
```

In general, I don't see value mentioning and linking the example commit again. It is already linked 2 lines above.

```suggestion
  - If it complains that the path for the controller is not present in the map, check the release branch of the new Kubernetes version and find the correct path for the missing/wrong controller. You can do so by checking the file `cmd/kube-controller-manager/app/controllermanager.go` and where the controller is initialized from. As of now, there is no straight-forward way to map each controller to its file. If this has improved, please enhance the script.
```

  - Make sure that the API groups in [this](../../pkg/utils/validation/apigroups/apigroups.go) file are in sync with the groups in [this](../../pkg/utils/kubernetes/controllers.go) file. Please note that, for example, `core/v1` is replaced by the script as `v1` and `apiserverinternal` as `internal`. This is because the API groups registered by the apiserver ([example](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/8a9b209cb11943f4d53a0d840b55cf92ebfbe004/staging/src/k8s.io/api/apiserverinternal/v1alpha1/register.go#L26)) and the file path imported by the controllers ([example](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/8a9b209cb11943f4d53a0d840b55cf92ebfbe004/pkg/controller/storageversiongc/gc_controller.go#L24)) might be slightly different in some cases.

>   - Maintain the names of controllers used for workerless Shoots, [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/6988da80bae6ba827d63535655f28885d91b0a23/pkg/component/kubernetes/controllermanager/controllermanager.go#L744-L766) after carefully evaluating whether they are needed if there are no workers. It is quite possible google or the kubernetes documentation to be insufficient in finding out what a given controller does. Therefore searching the `kubernetes/kubernetes` repo for the controller name and through that tracking the PR that introduces the controller might be nessesary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Maintain the names of controllers used for workerless Shoots, [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/6988da80bae6ba827d63535655f28885d91b0a23/pkg/component/kubernetes/controllermanager/controllermanager.go#L744-L766) after carefully evaluating whether they are needed if there are no workers. Google or the Kubernetes documentation might not always explain what a specific controller does. In such cases, you may need to search the [`kubernetes/kubernetes`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes) repository for the controller's name and find the pull request that introduced it.
```

>   - Maintain the names of controllers used for workerless Shoots, [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/6988da80bae6ba827d63535655f28885d91b0a23/pkg/component/kubernetes/controllermanager/controllermanager.go#L744-L766) after carefully evaluating whether they are needed if there are no workers. Google or the Kubernetes documentation might not always explain what a specific controller does. In such cases, you may need to search the [`kubernetes/kubernetes`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes) repository for the controller's name and find the pull request that introduced it.

Reviewer: Is the indentation expected (on purpose)?

>   - Maintain the names of controllers used for workerless Shoots, [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/6988da80bae6ba827d63535655f28885d91b0a23/pkg/component/kubernetes/controllermanager/controllermanager.go#L744-L766) after carefully evaluating whether they are needed if there are no workers. Google or the Kubernetes documentation might not always explain what a specific controller does. In such cases, you may need to search the [`kubernetes/kubernetes`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes) repository for the controller's name and find the pull request that introduced it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Maintain the names of controllers used for workerless Shoots, [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/6988da80bae6ba827d63535655f28885d91b0a23/pkg/component/kubernetes/controllermanager/controllermanager.go#L744-L766) after carefully evaluating whether they are needed if there are no workers. The Kubernetes documentation might not always explain what a specific controller does. In such cases, you may need to search the [`kubernetes/kubernetes`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes) repository for the controller's name and find the pull request that introduced it.
```

- Maintain copies of the `DaemonSet` controller's scheduling logic:
  - `gardener-resource-manager`'s [`Node` controller](../concepts/resource-manager.md#node-controller) uses a copy of parts of the `DaemonSet` controller's logic for determining whether a specific `Node` should run a daemon pod of a given `DaemonSet`: see [this file](../../pkg/resourcemanager/controller/node/criticalcomponents/helper/daemon_controller.go).
  - See [this](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/11197/commits/69f869e89425bc4709b0196b844e4916df6d3839) example commit.
  - Check the referenced upstream files for changes to the `DaemonSet` controller's logic and adapt our copies accordingly. This might include introducing version-specific checks in our codebase to handle different shoot cluster versions.

> - Search for `<new-version>` through `gardener/gardener`:

Reviewer 2: I find the wording in this bullet a bit confusing wrt to the sub-bullets. What was the idea behind restructuring them?

Reviewer 3: This bullet point contextualizes the sub-bullets. For example `Maintain version specific defaulting logic in shoot admission plugin.` is too vague of a task. How to you find out that `version specific defaulting logic`? Therefore `Search for <new-version> through gardener/gardener` attempts to provide an actionable step when doing the sub-tasks

> - Search for `<new-version>` through `gardener/gardener`:

Reviewer: The bullet should describe in short what the task is. "Search for `<new-version>` through `gardener/gardener" is not a concrete task with an end goal. "Maintain version specific defaulting logic in shoot admission plugin:" is a concrete task.

I agree with @plkokanov that the wording of this step could be improved. Something like "Handle Kubernetes version specific changes"? I am open to other suggestions.

  - Make sure that the API groups in [this](../../pkg/utils/validation/apigroups/apigroups.go) file are in sync with the groups in [this](../../pkg/utils/kubernetes/controllers.go) file. Please note that, for example, `core/v1` is replaced by the script as `v1` and `apiserverinternal` as `internal`. This is because the API groups registered by the apiserver ([example](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/8a9b209cb11943f4d53a0d840b55cf92ebfbe004/staging/src/k8s.io/api/apiserverinternal/v1alpha1/register.go#L26)) and the file path imported by the controllers ([example](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/8a9b209cb11943f4d53a0d840b55cf92ebfbe004/pkg/controller/storageversiongc/gc_controller.go#L24)) might be slightly different in some cases.

>   - Maintain the names of controllers used for workerless Shoots, [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/6988da80bae6ba827d63535655f28885d91b0a23/pkg/component/kubernetes/controllermanager/controllermanager.go#L744-L766) after carefully evaluating whether they are needed if there are no workers. It is quite possible google or the kubernetes documentation to be insufficient in finding out what a given controller does. Therefore searching the `kubernetes/kubernetes` repo for the controller name and through that tracking the PR that introduces the controller might be nessesary.

Reviewer 2: Isn't this documentation still relevant?
